CS 370: Operating Systems  Spring 2020 
Colorado State University   INSTRUCTOR: Yashwant K Malaiya/Jack Applin 
 
CS370 Operating Systems 
Spring 2020 Term Project   v. 02.15.2020 
You have two options.   
A. Research: You will research a topic of current interest and at the end prepare a term Project 
Report.  You will also produce a presentation for the benefit of fellow students. The presentation 
will take the form slides and a poster presentation (if logistics permit). The objective of this project 
is for you to explore the state of the art relating to some of the topics in the class.  
B. Development: Design and implement a new embedded/IoT application using a single-board 
computer (like a Raspberry Pi or an alternative), which implements the required features. You 
must formulate, design, implement and evaluate the system yourself. Your report should provide 
a good documentation.  
Deadlines:  The due dates for both options for the deliverables D1 to D5 are given below. They are subject 
to revision based on logistics.  
Deliverable Date Points 
D1 Team composition and idea proposal 2/27/2020 Th 5% 
D2 Progress report 4/2/2020 Th 15% 
D3 Slides and final reports 4/30/2020 Th 75%* 
D4 Posters or Demos 5/5 or 5/7 T or Th * 
D5: Peer Reviews 5/9/2020 Sat 5% 
 
This assignment would be worth 10 points towards your final grade. D3 and D4 combined are worth 75%. 
This includes your participation in viewing the work of other fellow students and participation in the 
related events. 
Forming the groups:  You can take the lead and try to form a group (by advertising it on Piazza), or join a 
group others are trying to form. A group will have 2 or 3 students (4 with permission). You can claim a 
topic as your own by mentioning it on Piazza with the topic clearly identified in the post title (for example 
“Research Topic 3: Simultaneous multithreading scheduling and performance”).  All members of a group 
must join a formal Canvas group, the progress report and the final report will be group submissions on 
canvas. 
All submissions will be using Canvas, with the exception of the slides that will be shared on Piazza.  The 
final report for both options will be in two-column format used by IEEE/ACM.  
Citations:  Citations (1) relate to work that has been published elsewhere, (2) substantiate your claims, 
and (3) could be used by readers to dig a little deeper. Remember to number your references and list 
them in your bibliography in the order they are referenced throughout the paper. If an article is in your 
bibliography, it must cited in the main text. Citing at the right location indicates what your source is for a 
particular piece of information, and also demonstrates that you have read the article. Make sure that you 
cite all your references including Wikipedia and Online lecture notes that you may have perused. 
References that are not cited should not be in your bibliography. 
 
CS 370: Operating Systems  Spring 2020 
Colorado State University   INSTRUCTOR: Yashwant K Malaiya/Jack Applin 
 
Option A Research:  Detailed information 
The research term paper will be based on a comprehensive study of a particular topic related to the 
current state of technology and recent trends. You are required to formulate your own views of the topic 
once you have understood the concept well. You will also mention how you expect things to evolve in the 
future. 
List of recommended topics: You may choose from the list below. If you want you may choose slightly 
different topics after consulting with the instructor.   
 
Multicore Processors:  
 
1. Multicore schedulers 
2. Resource management. How to utilize and manage computational resources in multicore systems. 
3. Virtualization in multicore systems. 
 
Virtualization: 
4. Storage virtualization (e.g. Instance Store, Elastic Block Storage, others) 
5. Security issues in hypervisors 
6. Live migration of Virtual Machines 
7. Virtualization schedulers comparison (e.g. Xen SEDF, Credit, BVT) 
 
Multithreading: 
8. Simultaneous multithreading: evolution/status/future 
9. Multithreading vs Multicore: systematic detailed examination 
 
Cloud as a system element:  (Note: Do not do a survey of cloud computing.) 
10. Serverless architecture 
11. Microservices - development and verification 
12. Containers/clusters/edge/fog computing: in-depth technical discussion of one or more. 
13. Cloud gaming  performance evaluation  
14. Evaluation of disaster recovery using virtualization 
Embedded/IoT systems:  
15. Testing approaches for embedded system software/hardware 
16. IoT reliability evaluation 
17. IoT security issues and possible mitigation 
Special topics: 
18. Blockchain/ Cryptocurrency-oriented  operating systems 
19. Completely Fair Scheduler and its performance 
20. Newer files systems: technical details of Ext4 and HDFS (you will need to go beyond what we will do 
in the class. Ask me for a preliminary set of slides). 
CS 370: Operating Systems  Spring 2020 
Colorado State University   INSTRUCTOR: Yashwant K Malaiya/Jack Applin 
 
21. Emerging storage technologies and associated file systems 
D1: Detailed Abstract: 
The first deliverable of the term paper is a detailed abstract, around 1000 words. It should include a 
brief description of the topic and include a minimum of 6-8 total citations of appropriate papers or 
references.  
It must have the following components: 
1. Why is this particular topic important now? Why did you choose it? 
2. Why will this be important in the future? 
3. A history of how this aspect has evolved in the past? The driving forces behind this. 
4. A quick snapshot of the current state of the art for this particular aspect. 
Items (3) and (4) should cite at least 5-6 references. 
D2: Progress report:  It should report on the progress and what the final report is expected to contain.  All 
the references used (at least 8-10) should be cited. Before submitting the Progress Report, you must join 
a Canvas group along with your group members. The Progress Report will be submitted as a group 
document. You must include enough material from the proposal to ensure that the Progress Report can 
be read without having to look at the proposal. 
 
D3: Final Report: 
The finished term paper should be approximately 4000 words and include a minimum of 10-15 total 
references supporting the paper. The final term paper must be coherent, succinct, and readable. It 
should include the following: 
1. Abstract: Compact one-paragraph overview of the project. 
2. An introduction that outlines the rationale, organization, and key contributions of the term 
paper. 
3. A literature survey of the topics that contrasts different approaches to the problem. 
4. Limitations in the current approaches that may not be suitable in the future, and potential 
improvements. 
5. At least some non-text elements – figures, tables, mathematical analysis, algorithms etc. 
6. A conclusion that includes assertions about the state of the art of the topic that you have 
surveyed. This will also include 4-5 key assertions about what you expect things to look like in 
the next 2-4 years. 
Also note that a peer review of (a) people in your team and (b) some of projects of other groups will be 
required. 
 
D4: Presentation: The presentation will take the form of a PowerPoint presentation and a poster 
(depending on logistics).  Details will be provided later after the department has scheduled the poster 
sessions. 
D5: Peer review of a specific number of presentations (and contributions of members of your team). 
Details and the form to be used will be provided later. 
CS 370: Operating Systems  Spring 2020 
Colorado State University   INSTRUCTOR: Yashwant K Malaiya/Jack Applin 
 
 
Option B Development: Detailed information 
As part of this Term Project option, you will be developing and evaluating a system built using a single-
board computer.   
Requirements: 
Project must involve a single board computer (such as a Raspberry Pi) with Wi-Fi capability which must 
have the capability of having an operating system installed on it.  The board must be capable of running 
all the project requirements satisfactorily 
The board will communicate with at least one other computer (another board, laptop or networked 
computer) and with at least one sensing device (sensor (temperature, pressure, location etc.), camera or 
a computation device supplying data). Optionally it can have an actuator to control mechanical 
movements.  After you have built your system, will evaluate for at least one attribute (potential security 
holes, power consumption, available resolution or reliability). 
You can use this document from a previous semester as a guide for setting up your board. (It is 
Raspberry Pi specific. You need to locate similar information for other boards.) 
D1. Team composition and idea proposal 
 
You will specify the project objective, select the appropriate board, and specific hardware and software 
needed. Your proposal must include a one paragraph justification of the choices. A back-of-napkin 
drawing can be included. Identify from where the board will be ordered (Please ensure that you will 
receive it within a week or so), and how you will obtain the needed software and documentation, and 
the expected cost. 
D2. Progress report  
 
At this point you must have acquired and installed all the software and hardware needed and should have 
made some progress in developing the code needed.  You need to include proof that you have acquired 
the board and any hardware needed. The report will describe the status of the project. You should also 
mention which attribute of your project you propose to evaluate.  You must evaluate at least two of these, 
using quantitative information (that you have to dig out). 
 
 Limitations like resolution, accuracy or response time 
 Potential security holes  and how they can be mitigated 
 Power consumption estimates/measurements of the device 
 Cost and marketability of a device based on your project 
 
You evaluation must be based on some hard data/analysis/experiments. 
 
You must include enough material from the proposal to ensure that the Progress Report can be read 
without having to look at the proposal. 
 
Before submitting the Progress Report, you must join a Canvas group along with your group members. 
The Progress Report will be submitted as a group document. 
CS 370: Operating Systems  Spring 2020 
Colorado State University   INSTRUCTOR: Yashwant K Malaiya/Jack Applin 
 
 
D3. Final report and demo:  
 
You will demonstrate your project to a TA for about 10-15 minutes. You will need to make an appointment. 
You can use photos and videos if they will help.  You will also need to demonstrate your project to fellow 
students in the class. 
 
The final report that you will submit will be a complete documentation of your project. In addition, the 
code developed will also need to be submitted. 
 
This report should be between 1500-2500 words excluding references. The report must include several 
elements, each of which will be a separate section. These include: 
 
 Abstract: Compact one-paragraph overview of the project. 
 Introduction 
 Problem characterization- This is a technical description of the problem. Your audience is 
your peers so present it in a way that they can appreciate. 
 Proposed solution and implementation strategy. Include i. Methodology and ii. a 
description of the libraries that you have used and what you did on your own. 
 Conclusions 
 Bibliography 
 
 
D4. Summary report in form of slides  
 
A set of slides will be needed to be shared with the rest of the class. 
 
D5: Peer review of a specific number of presentations (and contributions of members of your team). 
Details and the form to be used will be provided later. 
 
 
Updates: Any updates will be mentioned below. 
 
